Difference Between Oracle and MySQL
1. Developed By
Oracle: Developed and maintained by Oracle Corporation.
MySQL: Originally developed by MySQL AB, and later acquired and maintained by Oracle Corporation.
2. Type
Oracle: An Enterprise Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) designed for large-scale, mission-critical applications.
MySQL: An Open-source Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) commonly used for web and business applications.
3. License
Oracle: A commercial (paid) database with limited free editions such as Oracle Express Edition (XE).
MySQL: Available as a free Community Edition and a paid Enterprise Edition with additional features and support.
4. Performance
Oracle: Optimized for large enterprise applications that require high performance and handle massive amounts of data.
MySQL: Best suited for small to medium-sized applications and web-based projects.
5. Scalability
Oracle: Offers high scalability, making it suitable for large organizations with growing data and user demands.
MySQL: Provides moderate scalability, making it ideal for small and medium-sized businesses.
6. Security
Oracle: Includes advanced security features such as data encryption, auditing, role-based access control, and data masking.
MySQL: Provides good security features, including user authentication, access control, and SSL support.
7. Database Creation
Oracle: Databases are usually created and managed by a Database Administrator (DBA). Users connect to an existing database and create objects like tables within their own schema.
MySQL: Users typically create a database themselves using the CREATE DATABASE command before creating tables.
8. Date Format

Oracle: Common date formats are:

DD-MM-YYYY
DD-MON-YYYY

Example: 31-DEC-2024

MySQL: Uses the standard date format:

YYYY-MM-DD

Example: 2024-12-31

9. Command to Select Database
Oracle: No USE command is required. Users connect directly to their assigned database schema.
MySQL: Before working with tables, the desired database must be selected using:
USE database_name;
10. Primary Use
Oracle: Widely used in Banking, ERP systems, Healthcare, Government organizations, Telecommunications, and other large enterprises where reliability, security, and scalability are critical.
MySQL: Commonly used for Web applications, E-commerce websites, Content Management Systems (CMS), Startups, and Small to Medium Businesses (SMBs) due to its simplicity and open-source nature.